C memory management (#231)
codewars/docs: content/languages/c/authoring/memory-management-techniques.md

    //no need to deallocate the array
}

Test(random_tests, large_inputs) {

    const int MAX_TEST = 1000;

    //ten random tests
    for(int i=0; i<10; ++i) {

        //randomize the input
        int rows = rand() % MAX_TEST + 1;

        //query the solution for required size of the answer
        int terms_count = count_elements_of_pascal_triangle(rows);

        //You can perform assertions on the returned size here, or
        //you can create a separate suite just to test the
        //count_elements_of_pascal_triangle function

        //dynamically allocate an array large enough to fit the answer
        int* array = malloc(sizeof(int) * terms_count);

        //use the allocated array when calling the user's solution
        get_elements_of_pascal_triangle(rows, array);

        //...perform assertions, verify correctness of returned numbers...

        //release the memory after the test
        free(array);
    }
}
```

This approach is used when the size of the answer cannot be easily inferred by the test suite, but can be efficiently calculated by the user, potentially without the overhead of calculating the actual solution.

> #### When the size is not known, and difficult to calculate: assume (or guess) the initial size and reallocate if too small

Reviewer: This seem like a valid approach, but the fact that the size isn't easily predictable probably means that the task is relatively high-level and the solution is heavy enough that reallocating memory there isn't that bad, while recalculating the result after the buffer was too small is...

Author: This approach is definitely used, but in various variants. Works well for functions which just fetch data, but I've seen it also in APIs for digital signature and encryption. Callee can keep track of partial progress on their own and reuse it, or they can allocate memory locally, drive the process to its end, and upon return signal the required amount of memory by out param and copy potentially truncated amount of data to the output buffer, etc. Possibilities are many.

It's used by quite a number of Win32 API functions, for example for [reading from the Windows registry](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/api/winreg/nf-winreg-reggetvaluea) (in particular, see the note on `HKEY_PERFORMANCE_DATA`), but as it's said, characteristic of that function is _not_ to perform heavy computations.

Nonetheless, my intention is not to create C programmers guide, I am just looking for a way to transfer some ideas to C authors and translators, to get rid of ideas like requirement of mallocing a 3-element array to return hours, minutes, and seconds. Or returning `Position**`, where each entry is... a pointer to an individually malloced, single `Position` :( And there are even worse. I just thought about collecting some ideas and throw them at the authors, so they could pick something suitable for their kata. It's meant to be CW- and kata-oriented, and not an industry grade HOWTO ;) That's why I do not want to make things too complex and too detailed. Maybe I already have, maybe this paragraph, or this whole article, is simply not necessary?

Reviewer: > if the whole point is to delegate allocations to the caller and it does not even know how the buffer was allocated

I feel like it's not too beneficial in this case. The reasons to do this may be:
* avoid reallocations if a function is called many times... it's not like it's called _millions_ of times on CW;
* allow using different allocation methods, especially in cross-platform code... is it worth it here?
So it's not like it's bad, but I'm not sure whether it should be in the tutorial. Those who are ready to read looong and complicated (relative to their level) tutorials may as well google themselves, while others would probably already be confused by this point. Anyway, I'm not the target audience, so I don't know what they need.

Author: Ok, I think I get what you mean, thanks. I will think what to do with this paragraph, but I think in the end I will just remove it.

Do you think other parts are more or less OK? Should be simplified? Or maybe the whole article is pointless as no one would benefit from it?

Reviewer: I haven't read it all thoroughly, I'm not sure.

Author: This point has been removed.

## Two-dimensional arrays

Some kata require the user solution to return a two-dimensional array, for example a 2D matrix, or an array of C-strings. Such scenarios are a bit more complex, because not only the higher order array has to be properly managed, but all its individual entries as well. Exact approach selected for allocation of such structure depends on the scenario, because different techniques are suitable for square or rectangular arrays, jagged arrays, arrays of null-terminated strings, etc.

### Naive approach: N+1 allocations

### Flat array

Very often overlooked, but a very good approach to represent 2D arrays is to store them in a regular, linear array of `T[ ]`. It can be effectively used when bounds between inner arrays can be efficiently determined, for example each row of a matrix has a well known length, rows of a Pascal's triangle have precisely defined, although different, lengths, and string entries are clearly terminated.

This way, complexity of memory management is greatly reduced, because whole necessary memory can be allocated and freed with a single call to `malloc` (or equivalent) and `free`.

> Drawbacks of this approach is that the interface of the solution does not resemble its logical structure, i.e. elements of a matrix cannot be accessed with, for example, `matrix[row][col]`, but with `matrix[row * size + col]`.

Reviewer: `matrix[row][col]` can be used, it just require a type cast. C99 is more than 20 years old, so it's not even _modern_ C, it's just C.

Author: Oh, this is interesting. Could you show me then how it would work in such case then?

```c
int w = rand() % 100 + 10, h = rand() % 50 + 10;
char* maze_buffer = malloc(w * h + 1);
generate_maze(maze_buffer, w, h); //invoke user solution

//how can I cast the linear maze_buffer to 2D maze?
??? maze = (???)maze_buffer;  //how to cast it?
char cell = maze[5][3];

//....
free(maze_buffer);
```

I stopped working with C before 2005, so even C99 was not widespread across compilers back then :D Thanks!

Reviewer: `char (*maze)[w] = (char(*)[w])maze_buffer;` for an existing buffer, just `char maze[h][w];` for allocation on stack, `void generate_maze(size_t w, size_t h, char maze_buffer[h][w])` as a function argument (dimensions have to be before the array), asterisks may be used in prototypes like `void generate_maze(size_t, size_t, char maze_buffer[*][*]` when there are no named arguments.

Author: Oh great, thank you. I was not aware that it's possible to use variables in type specifiers. Smarter every day!

Author: I cannot get to declaring the return type of the function. I think it has to stay as `char*` and casts have to be done by the party accessing it, i.e. by solution to fill in, and by the test suite to read it?

Reviewer: Actually, both dimensions can be in the type, just as with regular arrays: `char (*maze)[h][w] = (char(*)[h][w])maze_buffer;`. As for returning it, I don't think it's possible, it still is a low level language.

Author: I added a note on casting between linear and 2d array.

When the structure, layout, or allocation scheme of pointed data is not described, users cannot know how to implement requirements without causing either a crash or a memory leak.

### Interface

It often happens that the solution function has to accept and return more values than just these related to the kata task itself. There can be more parameters required for tracking the memory, sizes of allocated buffers, statuses, etc. Depending on exact requirements, these parameters can be passed in and returned as separate function arguments, or can be packed together into some kind of structure. Examples in this article assume the former, but authors are free to decide otherwise.

### Arrays and strings

Since C-strings and arrays of other types are similar from the perspective of memory management, most of the techniques presented here apply equally to handling memory holding integers, floats, and characters, zero-terminated or not.

## Memory Management Patterns

> In C, unlike for example Python, Java, C# or Javascript, dynamically allocated memory is not managed by the runtime. It's considered to be a resource like any other, for example a file, a DB or network connection, or a hardware device. The program itself has to take care of it properly, allocating it when necessary, and freeing when no longer needed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In C, unlike for example Python, Java, C#, or Javascript, dynamically allocated memory is not managed by the runtime. It's considered to be a resource like any other, for example, a file, a DB or network connection, or a hardware device. The program itself has to take care of it properly, allocating it when necessary, and freeing when no longer needed.
```

In kata, the memory can be managed either by the test suite, by the user, or both. Authors can choose the way how their kata should deal with memory and they can pick any ownership strategy. However, they should be aware of the advantages and disadvantages of each such strategy, and when and which applies the best. 

### Statically allocated constant data

> The best way to prevent problems with memory allocation is to avoid unnecessary memory allocation. This advice might sound tricky, but there are simply many kata that require dynamic memory allocation or operation on data pointed by pointers, while it's simply not necessary and could be avoided. One commonly occurring example of such a situation is when a kata requires returning a pointer to a string which could be replaced by a constant. It seems to appear particularly often when translating kata from other languages. Returning a string in high-level languages is not a problem, but in C it always raises questions of who should allocate it and how it should be allocated. Consider replacing the string with an `enum`. For example, if the requirement for the JavaScript version is: _"Return the string 'BLACK' if a black pawn will be captured first, 'WHITE' if a white one, and 'NONE' if all pawns are safe."_, the C version should preferably provide and use the named constants `BLACK`, `WHITE` and `NONE`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The best way to prevent problems with memory allocation is to avoid unnecessary memory allocation. This advice might sound tricky, but there are simply many kata that require dynamic memory allocation or operation on data pointed by pointers, while it's simply not necessary and could be avoided. One commonly occurring example of such a situation is when a kata requires returning a pointer to a string which could be replaced by a constant. It seems to appear particularly often when translating kata from other languages. Returning a string in high-level languages is not a problem, but in C it always raises questions of who should allocate it and how it should be allocated. Consider replacing the string with an `enum`. For example, if the requirement for the JavaScript version is: _"Return the string 'BLACK' if a black pawn will be captured first, 'WHITE' if a white one, and 'NONE' if all pawns are safe."_, the C version should preferably provide and use the named constants `BLACK`, `WHITE`, and `NONE`.
```

    //...perform assertions, verify correctness of returned numbers...

    //no need to deallocate the array
}

Test(random_tests, large_inputs) {

    const int MAX_TEST = 10000000;

    //dynamically allocate an array large enough to fit all possible answers.
    //allocate it once, and reuse it through the tests.
    int* array = malloc(sizeof(int) * MAX_TEST);

    //ten random tests
    for(int i=0; i<10; ++i) {

        //randomize the input
        int n = rand() % MAX_TEST + 1;

        //use preallocated array
        calculate_numbers(n, array);

        //...perform assertions, verify correctness of returned numbers...
    }

    //release the memory after all tests
    free(array);
}
```

</details>

This technique is often overlooked by kata authors, but it greatly simplifies the way how user solutions are built and how they communicate with the test suite. The user's solution does not have to worry about allocations or error handling, and can focus on its task. The test suite can use any allocation technique it wants, like automatic allocation on the stack, or dynamic allocation on a heap. Buffers can be allocated once and reused across many test calls.

> The biggest problem with allocated memory is that its size has to be known or possible to estimate before calling the user's solution. It's very often the case, but sometimes such estimation is not possible or easy. There are ways to work around this problem and work with memory allocated by the caller even when its size is not known upfront, but they are out of the scope of this article. In such cases, kata can use a memory allocated by the user.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The biggest problem with allocated memory is that its size has to be known or possible to estimate before calling the user's solution. It's very often the case, but sometimes such estimation is not possible or easy. There are ways to work around this problem and work with memory allocated by the caller even when its size is not known upfront, but they are out of the scope of this article. In such cases, kata can use memory allocated by the user.
```

### Mixed approach: `malloc` in the solution and `free` in tests

> In a vast majority of cases when a kata requires the solution to allocate memory, authors choose the naive approach of allocating the memory in the solution, and releasing it with `free` in the test suite after performing all necessary assertions. This mimics the behavior known from high-level languages where returning an array or object from inside of the user's solution is perfectly valid, but it's not always the best, or even correct, way of working with unmanaged memory in C.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the vast majority of cases when a kata requires the solution to allocate memory, authors choose the naive approach of allocating the memory in the solution, and releasing it with `free` in the test suite after performing all necessary assertions. This mimics the behavior known from high-level languages where returning an array or object from inside of the user's solution is perfectly valid, but it's not always the best, or even correct, way of working with unmanaged memory in C.
```

### Interface

It often happens that the solution function has to accept and return more values than just these related to the kata task itself. There can be more parameters required for tracking the memory, sizes of allocated buffers, statuses, etc. Depending on exact requirements, these parameters can be passed in and returned as separate function arguments, or can be packed together into some kind of structure. Examples in this article assume the former, but authors are free to decide otherwise.

### Arrays and strings

Since C-strings and arrays of other types are similar from the perspective of memory management, this article uses examples of integer arrays. However, most of the techniques presented here apply equally to handling memory holding integers, floats, and characters, zero-terminated or not.

## Memory Management Patterns

In C, unlike for example Python, Java, C# or Javascript, dynamically allocated memory is not managed by the runtime. It's considered to be an external resource, just like a file, a DB or network connection, or a hardware device. The program itself has to take care of it properly, allocating it when necessary, and freeing when no longer needed.

> In a kata, the memory can be managed either by the test suite, by the user, or both. Authors can choose the way how their kata should deal with memory and ownership strategy their kata should use. However, they should be aware of the advantages and disadvantages of each such strategy, and when and which applies the best. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In kata, the memory can be managed either by the test suite, by the user, or both. Authors can choose the way how their kata should deal with memory and the ownership strategy their kata should use. However, they should be aware of the advantages and disadvantages of each such strategy, and when and which applies the best. 
```

### Statically allocated constant data

> The best way to avoid problems with memory allocation is to avoid unnecessary memory allocation. This advice might sound tricky, but there are simply many kata which require dynamic memory allocation or operation on data pointed by pointers, while it's not necessary and could be avoided. One commonly occuring example of such situation is when a kata requires returning a pointer to a string which could be replaced by a constant, which is used in particular when translating kata from other languages. Returning a string in high-level languages is not a problem, but in C it always raises questions of who should allocate it and how it should be allocated. Consider replacing the string with some simpler data type (eventually aliased with a `typedef`), and/or provide some symbolic constants for available values. For example, if the requirement for the JavaScript version is: _"Return the string 'BLACK' if a black pawn will be captured first, 'WHITE' if a white one, and 'NONE' if all pawns are safe."_, C version should preferably provide and use the named constants `BLACK`, `WHITE` and `NONE`. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The best way to avoid problems with memory allocation is to avoid unnecessary memory allocation. This advice might sound tricky, but there are simply many kata that require dynamic memory allocation or operation on data pointed by pointers, while it's not necessary and could be avoided. One commonly occurring example of such a situation is when a kata requires returning a pointer to a string which could be replaced by a constant, which is used in particular when translating kata from other languages. Returning a string in high-level languages is not a problem, but in C it always raises questions of who should allocate it and how it should be allocated. Consider replacing the string with some simpler data type (eventually aliased with a `typedef`), and/or provide some symbolic constants for available values. For example, if the requirement for the JavaScript version is: _"Return the string 'BLACK' if a black pawn will be captured first, 'WHITE' if a white one, and 'NONE' if all pawns are safe."_, C version should preferably provide and use the named constants `BLACK`, `WHITE` and `NONE`. 
```
(yes, this does have a few changes, GH is not highlighting them for some reason)

//constants of type const char*, but it's recommended to take
//this step even further and use an enum.
typedef const char * const Player;

//define constants
Player BLACK = "BLACK";
Player WHITE = "WHITE";
Player NONE  = "NONE";
```

Solution:

```c

//Since Codewars does not allow header files for kata, declarations need to be repeated
typedef const char * const Player;
extern Player BLACK;
extern Player WHITE;
extern Player NONE; 

Player who_won(const char* board) //typedef used for return type 
{
    if(...) {
      return BLACK;    //return constant instead of an allocated string
    } else if (...) {
      return WHITE;
    } else {
      return NONE;
    }
}
```

Tests:

```c
//Since Codewars does not allow header files for kata, declarations need to be repeated
typedef const char * const Player;
extern Player BLACK;
extern Player WHITE;
extern Player NONE; 

Player who_won(const char* board);

Test(fixed_tests, no_one_won) {
 
  Player winner = who_won("B");

  //constants can be asserted on with cr_assert_eq
  cr_assert_eq(winner, NONE, "Expected: [%s], but was: [%s]", NONE, winner);

  //...no clean-up necessary
}
```

> It is recommended to replace constant strings with some even simpler type, preferrably an `enum`, but if authors really want to stick to strings for some reason, they can use them.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is recommended to replace constant strings with some even simpler type, preferably an `enum`, but if authors really want to stick to strings for some reason, they can use them.
```

</details>

### Memory managed by tests (i.e. caller)

One set of possible techniques assumes that the caller is the owner of allocated memory and tests should be responsible for allocating and releasing it. Memory is always allocated by the test suite, and the test suite can decide whether it wants to use memory allocated automatically (i.e. on the stack), dynamically (for example with `malloc`), or in some other available way. The test suite is also responsible for releasing it, if necessary. Such allocated buffer is passed to the user's solution to work on, and it's filled with the requested data.

> Sometimes it's perfectly known how large the result will be before the solution is called, or it's possible to pre-allocate a buffer which will be large enough for every call. For example, if the test suite asks to generate `n` Fibonacci numbers, it means that the resulting array needs to have the size of at least `n`. Sometimes the exact size is not known exactly, but it's possible to accurately estimate its upper bound. For example, a function that removes punctuation from a string needs to work on a buffer at least as large as an input string, but the result can turn out to be a bit smaller. In such cases, the test suite can allocate the buffer which would be big enough to keep the result, and pass it to the solution function:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Sometimes it's perfectly known how large the result will be before the solution is called, or it's possible to pre-allocate a buffer that will be large enough for every call. For example, if the test suite asks to generate `n` Fibonacci numbers, it means that the resulting array needs to have the size of at least `n`. Sometimes the exact size is not known exactly, but it's possible to accurately estimate its upper bound. For example, a function that removes punctuation from a string needs to work on a buffer at least as large as an input string, but the result can turn out to be a bit smaller. In such cases, the test suite can allocate the buffer which would be big enough to keep the result, and pass it to the solution function:
```

    //...actual calculations
}
```

```c
void calculate_numbers(size_t n, int result [n]);
Test(fixed_tests, small_inputs) {

    //requested amount of nubers
    const int to_generate = 4;

    //array allocated on stack,
    //the required size is perfectly known
    int result_array[to_generate];

    //pass the array to the function, and expect
    //it to be filled with the result
    calculate_numbers(to_generate, result_array);

    //...perform assertions, verify correctness of returned numbers...

    //no need to deallocate the array
}

Test(random_tests, large_inputs) {

    const int MAX_TEST = 10000000;

    //dynamically allocate an array large enough to fit all possible answers.
    //allocate it once, and reuse it through the tests.
    int* array = malloc(sizeof(int) * MAX_TEST);

    //ten random tests
    for(int i=0; i<10; ++i) {

        //randomize the input
        int n = rand() % MAX_TEST + 1;

        //use preallocated array
        calculate_numbers(n, array);

        //...perform assertions, verify correctness of returned numbers...
    }

    //release the memory after all tests
    free(array);
}
```

</details>

> This technique is often overlooked by kata authors, but it greatly simplifies the way how user solutions are built and how they communicate with the test suite. User's solution does not have to worry about allocations or error handling, and can focus on its task. Test suite can use any allocation technique it wants, like automatic allocation on the stack, or dynamic allocation on a heap. Buffer can be allocated once and reused accros many test calls.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This technique is often overlooked by kata authors, but it greatly simplifies the way how user solutions are built and how they communicate with the test suite. The user's solution does not have to worry about allocations or error handling, and can focus on its task. The test suite can use any allocation technique it wants, like automatic allocation on the stack, or dynamic allocation on a heap. Buffers can be allocated once and reused across many test calls.
```

> The biggest problem with allocated memory is that its size has to be known or possible to estimate before calling the user's solution. It's very often the case, but sometimes such estimation is not possible or easy. There are ways to work around this problem and work with memory allocated by the caller even when its size is not known upfront, but they are out of scope of this article. In such cases, kata can use a memory allocated by the user.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The biggest problem with allocated memory is that its size has to be known or possible to estimate before calling the user's solution. It's very often the case, but sometimes such estimation is not possible or easy. There are ways to work around this problem and work with memory allocated by the caller even when its size is not known upfront, but they are out of the scope of this article. In such cases, kata can use a memory allocated by the user.
```

### Mixed approach: `malloc` in the solution and `free` in tests

In a vast majority of cases when a kata requires the solution to allocate memory, authors choose the naive approach of allocating the memory in the solution, and releasing it with `free` in the test suite after performing all necessary assertions. This mimics the behavior known from high-level languages where returning an array or object from inside of the user's solution is perfectly valid, but it's not always the best, or even correct, way of working with unmanaged memory in C.

> This approach is useful when the size of the result is not known before the call. The solution is reponsible for finding the correct size and returning it along with the pointer to the buffer itself, and the test suite is responsible for freeing it after every call.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This approach is useful when the size of the result is not known before the call. The solution is responsible for finding the correct size and returning it along with the pointer to the buffer itself, and the test suite is responsible for freeing it after every call.
```

<details>

Kata task:

> > Given a natural nuber `n`, return all prime numbers up to and including `n`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> Given a natural number `n`, return all prime numbers up to and including `n`.
```

Solution:

```c
//get all prime numbers less than upto
//use an output parameter to return the size of the result
int* get_primes(int upto, int* size) {

    //the solution allocates required memory
    int* result = malloc(sizeof(int) * ...);

    //... fill result with primes
    //...

    *size = ...; //assign amount of primes
    return result;
}
```

Test suite:

```c
Test(fixed_tests, should_return_2_and_3_for_4) {
    
    int expected[] {2, 3}, expected_size = 2;
    int actual_size;
    
    //call user solution and expect it to allocate the returned array
    int* actual = get_primes(4, &actual_size);

    //...assert on actual_size
    //...assert on contents of actual

    //after performing all necessary assertions,
    //free the array allocated by the user solution
    free(actual);
}
```

</details>

This approach works in a way similar to functions like `strdup` or `asprintf`, which allocate required memory and pass its ownership to the caller. It's a good fit for Codewars kata because it's simple, effective, and works well in Codewars code runner.

> Potential issue with the mixed approach is not related to Codewars, but to "real world" C coding and design. It might not work well for complex memory structures, or when a callee has to do advanced book-keeping and tracking of allocated memory. It also does not work well when passing data between modules (for example, between libraries, or from a library to main program).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A potential issue with the mixed approach is not related to Codewars, but to "real world" C coding and design. It might not work well for complex memory structures, or when a callee has to do advanced book-keeping and tracking of allocated memory. It also does not work well when passing data between modules (for example, between libraries, or from a library to the main program).
```

Some kata require the user solution to return a two-dimensional array, for example, a 2D matrix, or an array of C-strings. Such scenarios are a bit more complex, because not only does the higher-order array have to be properly managed, but all its individual entries as well. The exact approach selected for the allocation of such structures depends on the scenario because different techniques are suitable for square or rectangular arrays, jagged arrays, arrays of null-terminated strings, etc.

Just as any memory, 2D arrays can be managed by the test suite, or the user solution, or both. As long as the size of the 2D array is known before calling a solution and does not change through the course of calculations, the test suite can choose to perform all necessary allocations and pass the memory to the solution function ready to use. This is a very good approach when working with chessboards, sudokus, matrices and mazes of predetermined sizes, etc. However, in the case that the size of the answer cannot be easily determined beforehand, the mixed approach or the memory management by a callee with a clean-up function provided by the user can be better.

:::note Note on examples

> For simplicity, this section uses terms "2D array", "array of arrays" and "matrix" interchangeably and assume row-major order, i.e. data can be accessed with `array[row][col]`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For simplicity, this section uses the terms "2D array", "array of arrays", and "matrix" interchangeably and assumes row-major order, i.e. data can be accessed with `array[row][col]`.
```

:::

### Naive approach: N+1 allocations

> This is the most common approach of using dynamically allocated multi-dimensional arrays. An array of pointers to rows is allocated first, and each row is allocated individually afterwrds.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is the most common approach of using dynamically allocated multidimensional arrays. An array of pointers to rows is allocated first, and each row is allocated individually afterwards.
```

<details>

Allocation:

```c
//allocate array of rows first
char** world = malloc(sizeof(char*) * world_h);
for(int i=0; i < world_h; ++i) {

    //allocate every row individually
    world[i] = malloc(world_w);
}
```    

Deallocation:

```c
//... deallocate all memory also row by row
for(int i=0; i < world_h; ++i)
    free(world[i]);

free(world);
}
```

</details>

This approach, although it seems to be simple, is affected by issues mostly related to performance. It tends to be slow, because every dynamic allocation requires a lookup of memory to be performed. It can also cause excessive memory fragmentation.

> Advantage of individually allocated rows is that ot works good for jagged arrays.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The advantage of individually allocated rows is that it works well for jagged arrays.
```

### Flat array

> Very often overlooked, but a very good approach to represent 2D arrays is to store them in a regular, linear array of `T[ ]`, potentially supported by some type casts between linear buffer and two-dimensional matrix. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Very often overlooked, but a very good approach to represent 2D arrays is to store them in a regular, linear array of `T[ ]`, potentially supported by some type casts between a linear buffer and two-dimensional matrix. 
```

<details>

```c
//declaration of solution accepting a two-dimentional array
void play_game_of_life(size_t world_h, size_t world_w, char world_2d[world_h][world_w]);

size_t world_h = ...;
size_t world_w = ...;

//allocating a linear buffer of memory for the world map
char* world_linear = malloc(world_h * world_w);

//cast a linear buffer to a 2D array
char (*world_2d)[world_h] = (char (*)[world_h])world_linear;

for(size_t row = 0; row < world_h; ++row) {
    for(size_t col = 0; col < world_w; ++col) {
    
        //...set up the world...

        //access a cell in linear buffer, or
        world_linear[row * world_w + col] = 'x'; //set a cell as alive

        //access a cell in 2d array
        world_2d[row][col] = ' '; //set a cell as dead
    }
}

//pass the 2d array to user solution
play_game_of_life(world_h, world_w, world_2d);

//deallocate all memory at once
free(world_linear);
```

</details>

This way, the complexity of memory management is greatly reduced since all necessary memory can be allocated and freed with a single call to `malloc` (or equivalent) and `free`.

> Drawback of the version with casts between linear and 2D array is that it is best suited for perfectly rectangular arrays, i.e. arrays whose sub-arrays all have equal length. However, the version without casts can be effectively used when bounds between inner arrays can be efficiently determined, for example, each row of a matrix has a well-known length, rows of a Pascal's triangle have precisely defined, although different, lengths, and string entries are clearly terminated.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The drawback of the version with casts between linear and 2D arrays is that it is best suited for perfectly rectangular arrays, i.e. arrays whose sub-arrays all have equal length. However, the version without casts can be effectively used when bounds between inner arrays can be efficiently determined, for example, each row of a matrix has a well-known length, rows of a Pascal's triangle have precisely defined, although different, lengths, and string entries are clearly terminated.
```

> This method also does not also fit perfectly the scenario when such array should be *returned* from a function. The function still has to specify its return type as `T*`, and the caller has to either work with linear form of the array, or perform the cast on its own.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This method also does not fit perfectly the scenario when such an array should be *returned* from a function. The function still has to specify its return type as `T*`, and the caller has to either work with the linear form of the array or perform the cast on its own.
```

### Interface

It often happens that the solution function has to accept and return more values than just these related to the kata task itself. There can be more parameters required for tracking the memory, sizes of allocated buffers, statuses, etc. Depending on exact requirements, these parameters can be passed in and returned as separate function arguments, or can be packed together into some kind of structure. Examples in this article assume the former, but authors are free to decide otherwise.

### Arrays and strings

Since C-strings and arrays of other types are similar from the perspective of memory management, most of the techniques presented here apply equally to handling memory holding integers, floats, and characters, zero-terminated or not.

## Memory Management Patterns

In C, unlike for example Python, Java, C# or Javascript, dynamically allocated memory is not managed by the runtime. It's considered to be an external resource, just like a file, a DB or network connection, or a hardware device. The program itself has to take care of it properly, allocating it when necessary, and freeing when no longer needed.

> In a kata, the memory can be managed either by the test suite, by the user, or both. Authors can choose the way how their kata should deal with memory and they can pick any ownership strategy. However, they should be aware of the advantages and disadvantages of each such strategy, and when and which applies the best. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In kata, the memory can be managed either by the test suite, by the user, or both. Authors can choose the way how their kata should deal with memory and they can pick any ownership strategy. However, they should be aware of the advantages and disadvantages of each such strategy, and when and which applies the best. 
```

### Statically allocated constant data

> The best way to avoid problems with memory allocation is to avoid unnecessary memory allocation. This advice might sound tricky, but there are simply many kata which require dynamic memory allocation or operation on data pointed by pointers, while it's simply not necessary and could be avoided. One commonly occuring example of such situation is when a kata requires returning a pointer to a string which could be replaced by a constant. It seems to appear particularly often when translating kata from other languages. Returning a string in high-level languages is not a problem, but in C it always raises questions of who should allocate it and how it should be allocated. Consider replacing the string with some simpler data type (eventually aliased with a `typedef`), and/or provide some symbolic constants for available values. For example, if the requirement for the JavaScript version is: _"Return the string 'BLACK' if a black pawn will be captured first, 'WHITE' if a white one, and 'NONE' if all pawns are safe."_, C version should preferably provide and use the named constants `BLACK`, `WHITE` and `NONE`. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The best way to avoid problems with memory allocation is to avoid unnecessary memory allocation. This advice might sound tricky, but there are simply many kata that require dynamic memory allocation or operation on data pointed by pointers, while it's simply not necessary and could be avoided. One commonly occurring example of such a situation is when a kata requires returning a pointer to a string which could be replaced by a constant. It seems to appear particularly often when translating kata from other languages. Returning a string in high-level languages is not a problem, but in C it always raises questions of who should allocate it and how it should be allocated. Consider replacing the string with some simpler data type (eventually aliased with a `typedef`), and/or provide some symbolic constants for available values. For example, if the requirement for the JavaScript version is: _"Return the string 'BLACK' if a black pawn will be captured first, 'WHITE' if a white one, and 'NONE' if all pawns are safe."_, C version should preferably provide and use the named constants `BLACK`, `WHITE` and `NONE`. 
```

:::note Note on examples
For simplicity, this section uses the terms "2D array", "array of arrays", and "matrix" interchangeably and assumes row-major order, i.e. data can be accessed with `array[row][col]`.
:::

### Naive approach: N+1 allocations

This is the most common approach of using dynamically allocated multidimensional arrays. An array of pointers to rows is allocated first, and each row is allocated individually afterwards.

<details>
    <summary>Example</summary>

Allocation:

```c
//allocate array of rows first
char** world = malloc(sizeof(char*) * world_h);
for(int i=0; i < world_h; ++i) {

    //allocate every row individually
    world[i] = malloc(world_w);
}
```    

Deallocation:

```c
//... deallocate all memory also row by row
for(int i=0; i < world_h; ++i)
    free(world[i]);

free(world);
}
```

</details>

> Advantage of individually allocated rows is that it works good for jagged arrays.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The advantage of individually allocated rows is that it works well for jagged arrays.
```

This approach, although it seems to be simple, is affected by issues mostly related to performance. It tends to be slow, because every dynamic allocation requires a lookup of memory to be performed. It can also cause excessive memory fragmentation.

> Additionally, it is sometimes unnecessarily used to return an array of data (usualy strings) which could be turned into constants.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Additionally, it is sometimes unnecessarily used to return an array of data (usually strings) that could be turned into constants.
```

### Array of `const` data

> This approach is related to [returning a statically allocated const data](#statically-allocated-constant-data), but extended to arrays. Some kata require the user to return an array of strings, which coud be turned into constants. In such case, the array itself can be allocated dynamically, but its entries do not have to be.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This approach is related to [returning a statically allocated const data](#statically-allocated-constant-data) but extended to arrays. Some kata require the user to return an array of strings, which could be turned into constants. In such a case, the array itself can be allocated dynamically, but its entries do not have to be.
```

<details>
    <summary>Example</summary>

Kata task:

> Given a natural number `n`, return all prime numbers up to and including `n`.

Solution:

```c
//get all prime numbers less than upto
//use an output parameter to return the size of the result
int* get_primes(int upto, int* size) {

    //the solution allocates required memory
    int* result = malloc(sizeof(int) * ...);

    //... fill result with primes
    //...

    *size = ...; //assign amount of primes
    return result;
}
```

Test suite:

```c
Test(fixed_tests, should_return_2_and_3_for_4) {
    
    int expected[] {2, 3}, expected_size = 2;
    int actual_size;
    
    //call user solution and expect it to allocate the returned array
    int* actual = get_primes(4, &actual_size);

    //...assert on actual_size
    //...assert on contents of actual

    //after performing all necessary assertions,
    //free the array allocated by the user solution
    free(actual);
}
```

</details>

> This approach works in a way similar to functions like `strdup` or `asprintf`, which allocate required memory and pass its ownership to the caller. It's a good fit for Codewars kata because it's simple, effective, and works well in Codewars code runner.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This approach works in a way similar to functions like `strdup` or `asprintf`, which allocate required memory and pass its ownership to the caller. It's a good fit for Codewars kata because it's simple, effective, and works well in Codewars' code runner.
```

> A potential issue with the mixed approach is not related to Codewars, but to "real world" C coding and design. It might not work well for complex memory structures, or when a callee has to do advanced book-keeping and tracking of allocated memory. It also does not work well when passing data between modules (for example, between libraries, or from a library to the main program).

Reviewer 3: Please don't use "coding" as a synonym to "programming" ...

```suggestion
A potential issue with the mixed approach is not related to Codewars, but to "real world" C programming and design. It might not work well for complex memory structures, or when a callee has to do advanced book-keeping and tracking of allocated memory. It also does not work well when passing data between modules (for example, between libraries, or from a library to the main program).
```

### Memory managed by the solution

The opposite of managing memory in the test suite is the approach of delegating the responsibility to the solver. This way, tests do not need to worry about problematic aspects of memory management, kata authors give freedom of implementation to users, and can reduce the boilerplate required to implement memory management.

This idea boils down to asking users to provide their equivalents of allocation and de-allocation functions. The solution function is responsible not only for solving the task but also for allocation of memory and storing of book-keeping information. The clean-up function is responsible for releasing resources.

> There are many possible ways of implementing the allocation scheme and corresponding clean-up function, but example implementation could be similar to:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
There are many possible ways of implementing the allocation scheme and corresponding clean-up function, but an example implementation could be:
```

//... perform assertions on the world map and verify the state of its cells

//call the clean-up function, which deallocates all memory
destroy_world(actual);

//...at this point memory is deallocated, no need to call free
```

</details>

Memory management by a callee is not a common requirement for Codewars kata. It can be useful when the memory is structured in a complex way, or when it has to be tracked in some particular way. It mimics the behavior of C libraries, which often provide symmetrical de/allocation functions, and/or use opaque pointers as elements of their interface.

## Two-dimensional arrays

Some kata require the user solution to return a two-dimensional array, for example, a 2D matrix, or an array of C-strings. Such scenarios are a bit more complex, because not only does the higher-order array have to be properly managed, but all its individual entries as well. The exact approach selected for the allocation of such structures depends on the scenario because different techniques are suitable for square or rectangular arrays, jagged arrays, arrays of null-terminated strings, etc.

> Just as any memory, 2D arrays can be managed by the test suite, or the user solution, or both. As long as the size of the 2D array is known before calling a solution and does not change through the course of calculations, the test suite can choose to perform all necessary allocations and pass the memory to the solution function ready to use. This is a very good approach when working with chessboards, sudokus, matrices and mazes of predetermined sizes, etc. However, in the case that the size of the answer cannot be easily determined beforehand, the mixed approach or the memory management by a callee with a clean-up function provided by the user can be better.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Just as any form of memory, 2D arrays can be managed by the test suite, user solution, or both. As long as the size of the 2D array is known before calling a solution and does not change through the course of calculations, the test suite can choose to perform all necessary allocations and pass the memory to the solution function ready to use. This is a very good approach when working with chessboards, sudokus, matrices and mazes of predetermined sizes, etc. However, in the case that the size of the answer cannot be easily determined beforehand, the mixed approach or memory management by the callee with a clean-up function provided by the user can be better.
```

:::note Note on examples
For simplicity, this section uses the terms "2D array", "array of arrays", and "matrix" interchangeably and assumes row-major order, i.e. data can be accessed with `array[row][col]`.
:::

### Naive approach: N+1 allocations

This is the most common approach of using dynamically allocated multidimensional arrays. An array of pointers to rows is allocated first, and each row is allocated individually afterwards.

<details>
    <summary>Example</summary>

Allocation:

```c
//allocate array of rows first
char** world = malloc(sizeof(char*) * world_h);
for(int i=0; i < world_h; ++i) {

    //allocate every row individually
    world[i] = malloc(world_w);
}
```    

Deallocation:

```c
//... deallocate all memory also row by row
for(int i=0; i < world_h; ++i)
    free(world[i]);

free(world);
}
```

</details>

The advantage of individually allocated rows is that it works well for jagged arrays.

> This approach, although it seems to be simple, is affected by issues mostly related to performance. It tends to be slow, because every dynamic allocation requires a lookup of memory to be performed. It can also cause excessive memory fragmentation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This approach, despite appearing to be simple, is affected by issues mostly related to performance. It tends to be slow since each dynamic allocation requires a memory lookup. It can also cause excessive memory fragmentation.
```

### Naive approach: `malloc` in the solution and `free` in tests

In a vast majority of cases when a kata requires the solution to allocate memory, authors choose the naive approach of allocating the memory in the solution, and releasing it with `free` in the test suite after performing all necessary assertions:

<details>

Solution:

```c
//get all prime numbers less than upto
int* get_primes(int upto, int* size) {

    //the solution allocates required memory
    int* result = malloc(sizeof(int) * ...);

    //... fill result with primes
    //...

    *size = ...; //assign amount of primes
    return result;
}
```

Test suite:

```c
Test(fixed_tests, should_return_2_and_3_for_4) {
    
    int expected[] {2, 3}, expected_size = 2;
    int actual_size;
    
    //call user solution and expect it to allocate the returned array
    int* actual = get_primes(4, &actual_size);

    //...assert on actual_size
    //...assert on contents of actual

    //after performing all necessary assertions,
    //free the array allocated by the user solution
    free(actual);
}
```

</details>

> This approach mimics the behavior of higher level languages, where functions are able to allocate and return arrays without problems. It seems a natural way for many authors, but, sometimes surplrisingly for them, it's often a bad one. It's often bad from the design point of view, but, even worse, in production setups it can be straight invalid and can lead to crashes.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This approach mimics the behavior of higher level languages, where functions are able to allocate and return arrays without problems. It seems a natural way for many authors, but, sometimes surprisingly for them, it's often a bad one. It's often bad from a design point of view, but, even worse, in production setups it can be straight invalid and can lead to crashes.
```

<details>

```c
Test(fixed_tests, small_inputs) {

    //requested amount of nubers
    const int to_generate = 4;

    //array allocated on stack,
    //the required size is perfectly known
    int result_array[to_generate];

    //pass the array to the function, and expect
    //it to be filled with the result
    calculate_numbers(to_generate, result_array);

    //...perform assertions, verify correctness of returned numbers...

    //no need to deallocate the array
}

Test(random_tests, large_inputs) {

    const int MAX_TEST = 10000000;

    //dynamically allocate an array large enough to fit all possible answers.
    //allocate it once, and reuse it through the tests.
    int* array = malloc(sizeof(int) * MAX_TEST);

    //ten random tests
    for(int i=0; i<10; ++i) {

        //randomize the input
        int n = rand() % MAX_TEST + 1;

        //use preallocated array
        calculate_numbers(n, array);

        //...perform assertions, verify correctness of returned numbers...
    }

    //release the memory after all tests
    free(array);
}
```

</details>

#### When the size is not known, but is easy to calculate: ask and allocate

> Another possible approach is to ask user to implement _two_ functions: one which would return the size needed to fit the result, and another one to perform actual operation. For example:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Another possible approach is to ask the user to implement _two_ functions: one which would return the size needed to fit the result, and another one to perform the actual operation. For example:
```

<details>

Kata task:

> > Given a positive integer `n`, return all terms of `n` top rows of Pascal's triangle, row by row, flattened into a single array.

Reviewer 3: Unless this is a direct quote from another source:

```suggestion
> Given a positive integer `n`, return all terms in the top `n` rows of Pascal's triangle flattened into a single array.
```

    //ten random tests
    for(int i=0; i<10; ++i) {

        //randomize the input
        int rows = rand() % MAX_TEST + 1;

        //query the solution for required size of the answer
        int terms_count = count_elements_of_pascal_triangle(rows);

        //You can perform assertions on the returned size here, or
        //you can create a separate suite just to test the
        //count_elements_of_pascal_triangle function

        //dynamically allocate an array large enough to fit the answer
        int* array = malloc(sizeof(int) * terms_count);

        //use the allocated array when calling the user's solution
        get_elements_of_pascal_triangle(rows, array);

        //...perform assertions, verify correctness of returned numbers...

        //release the memory after the test
        free(array);
    }
}
```

</details>

This approach is used when the size of the answer cannot be easily inferred by the test suite, but can be efficiently calculated by the user, potentially without the overhead of calculating the actual solution.

#### When the size is not known, and difficult to calculate: assume (or guess) the initial size and reallocate if too small

> This approach is a combination of the two above. It has a somewhat complex interface, but allows for a performance compromise when the size of the result is not known upfront, and cannot be efficiently estimated without performing actual calculations. General scheme is that the test suite passes in some preallocated buffer, and when solution determines that the buffer is too small, it reports an error. The tests can use some strategy to grow the buffer and retry the solution. When the call to solution succeeds, it fills the buffer with the result and reports its size.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This approach is a combination of the two above. It has a somewhat complex interface, but allows for a performance compromise when the size of the result is not known upfront, and cannot be efficiently estimated without performing actual calculations. The general scheme is that the test suite passes in some pre-allocated buffer, and when the solution determines that the buffer is too small, it reports an error. The tests can then employ various strategies to grow the buffer and retry the solution. When the call to the solution succeeds, it fills the buffer with the result and reports its size.
```

:::info

> This paragraph is probably too complex and not suitable for Codewars kata. It will be probably removed.

Reviewer 4: +1 on removing this.

Author: Removed.

:::

<details>

Kata task:

> > Given an interer `n > 1`, calculate Fibonacci numbers up to `n`.

Reviewer 3: Unless this is a direct quote from another source:

```suggestion
> Given an integer `n > 1`, calculate Fibonacci numbers up to `n`.
```

        //randomize the input
        int upto = rand() % MAX_TEST + 5;
        

        int calculated_count;
        
        //call the user's solution and pass the initially allocated array
        Status status = calculate_fibonaccis(upto, array, array_size, &calculated_count);
        
        //when the solution concludes that the buffer is too small,
        //resize it and call the solution once again
        int retries = 0;
        while(status == BUFFER_TOO_SMALL) {
            array_size *= 2;
            array = realloc(array, sizeof(int) * array_size);
            status = calculate_fibonaccis(upto, array, array_size, &calculated_count);

            if(retries++ > MAX_RETRIES) {
                //... protect agains ill-behaving solutions which are not able to get the correct status
            }
        }
        
        //You can perform assertions on the status and returned size here, or
        //you can create a separate suite(s) just to test them separately

        //...perform assertions, verify correctness of returned numbers...
    }

    //release the memory after the test
    free(array);
}
```

</details>

### Memory managed by the solution

> Opposite of memory managed by the test suite is the approach of pushing the responsibility to the user. This way, tests do not need to worry about problematic aspects of memory management, kata authors give freedom of implementation to users, and can reduce the boilerplate required to implement memory management.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The opposite of managing memory in the test suite is the approach of delegating the responsibility to the solver. This way, tests do not need to worry about problematic aspects of memory management, kata authors give freedom of implementation to users, and can reduce the boilerplate required to implement memory management.
```

#### Symmetric functions for allocation and deallocation

> This idea basically boils down to asking users to provide their equivalents of allocation and deallocation functions. Solution function is responsible not only for solving the task, but also for allocation of the memory, and storing of book-keeping information. Clean-up function is responsible for releasing resources.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This idea basically boils down to asking users to provide their equivalents of allocation and de-allocation functions. The solution function is responsible not only for solving the task, but also for allocation of memory and storing of book-keeping information. The clean-up function is responsible for releasing resources.
```

> There's many possible ways of implementing the allocation scheme and corresponding clean-up function, and its usage usually ends up being similar to the [naive approach](#naive-approach-malloc-in-the-solution-and-free-in-tests) described in the beginning. Example implementation could be similar to:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
There are many possible ways of implementing the allocation scheme and corresponding clean-up function, and its usage usually ends up being similar to the [naive approach](#naive-approach-malloc-in-the-solution-and-free-in-tests) described in the beginning. An example implementation could be similar to:
```

<details>

Kata task:

> > Given initial generation of a Game of Life population, return the state and the size of the game world after `n` generations.

Reviewer 3: Unless this is a direct quote from another source:

```suggestion
> Given the initial generation of a Game of Life population, return the state and size of the game world after `n` generations.
```

char** game_of_life(int generations, char** initial_generation, int* world_h, int* world_w) {

    char** world = ...; //allocating memory for the world map
    
    for(int i=0 i < generations; ++i) {
        //... actual game, which potentially requires additional (re)allocations
    }

    //return the final state of the game world to the caller
    return world;
}

//clean-up function
void destroy_world(char** world) {
    //... deallocate all memory appropriately in a way
    //which matches how the game_of_life allocated it.
}
```

Tests:

```c
int world_w = 3, world_h = 3;
char** initial_generation = ...; //set up a GoL glider
int generations = 25;

//invoke solution function, which allocates memory
char** actual = game_of_life(generations, initial_generation, &world_h, &world_w);

//... perform assertions on the world map and verify the state of its cells

//call the clean-up function, which deallocates all memory
destroy_world(actual);
```

</details>

As this approach very useful for more complex memory structures, a couple of examples can be found in the section on [Two-dimensional arrays](#two-dimensional-arrays).

## Two-dimensional arrays

> Some kata require the user solution to return a two-dimensional array, for example a 2D matrix, or an array of C-strings. Such scenarios are a bit more complex, because not only the higher order array has to be properly managed, but all its individual entries as well. Exact approach selected for allocation of such structure depends on the scenario, because different techniques are suitable for square or rectangular arrays, jagged arrays, arrays of null-terminated strings, etc.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Some kata require the user solution to return a two-dimensional array, for example a 2D matrix, or an array of C-strings. Such scenarios are a bit more complex, because not only does the higher order array have to be properly managed, but all its individual entries as well. The exact approach selected for allocation of such structures depend on the scenario, because different techniques are suitable for square or rectangular arrays, jagged arrays, arrays of null-terminated strings, etc.
```

> Memory for 2D arrays can be managed both by test suite, or the user solution. As long as the size of the 2D array is known before calling a solution and does not change through the course of calculations, test suite can choose to perform all necessary allocations, and pass the memory to the solution function ready to use. This is a very good approach when working with chessboards, sudokus, matrices and mazes of predetermined sizes, etc. However, when it would be the case that the size of the answer cannot be easily determined beforehand, the technique with clean-up function provided by the user turns out to be helpful. User provided clean-up function is used in the examples below, but authors can choose to manage the memory in the test suite if it fits the task of their kata.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Memory for 2D arrays can be managed by the test suite or the user solution. As long as the size of the 2D array is known before calling a solution and does not change through the course of calculations, the test suite can choose to perform all necessary allocations and pass the memory to the solution function ready to use. This is a very good approach when working with chessboards, sudokus, matrices and mazes of predetermined sizes, etc. However, in the case that the size of the answer cannot be easily determined beforehand, the technique with clean-up function provided by the user turns out to be helpful. A user provided clean-up function is used in the examples below, but authors can choose to manage the memory in the test suite if it fits the task of their kata.
```

### Naive approach: N+1 allocations

> This is the most common, and also the worst possible approach of using dynamically allocated memory. It tends to be slow, causes excessive memory fragmentation, and is usually inferior to available alternatives.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This is the most common yet worst possible approach of using dynamically allocated memory. It tends to be slow, causes excessive memory fragmentation and is usually inferior to available alternatives.
```

<details>

```c
char** game_of_life(int generations, char** initial_generation, int* world_h, int* world_w) {

     //allocating memory for the world map, row by row
    char** world = malloc(sizeof(char*) * world_h);
    for(int i=0; i < world_h; ++i)
        world[i] = malloc(world_w);
    
    for(int i=0 i < generations; ++i) {
        //... actual game, which potentially requires additional (re)allocations...
    }

    //return the final state of the game world to the caller
    return world;
}

void destroy_world(char** world, int world_h) {
    
    //... deallocate all memory also row by row
    for(int i=0; i < world_h; ++i)
        free(world[i]);
    free(world);
}
```

</details>

### Flat array

Very often overlooked, but a very good approach to represent 2D arrays is to store them in a regular, linear array of `T[ ]`. It can be effectively used when bounds between inner arrays can be efficiently determined, for example each row of a matrix has a well known length, rows of a Pascal's triangle have precisely defined, although different, lengths, and string entries are clearly terminated.

> This way, complexity of memory management is greatly reduced, because whole necessary memory can be allocated and freed with a single call to `malloc` (or equivalent) and `free`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This way, the complexity of memory management is greatly reduced since all necessary memory can be allocated and freed with a single call to `malloc` (or equivalent) and `free`.
```

> Drawbacks of this approach is that the interface of the solution does not resemble its logical structure, i.e. elements of a matrix cannot be accessed with, for example, `matrix[row][col]`, but with `matrix[row * size + col]`. It also fits best rectangular arrays (i.e. arrays with equal length of all rows).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Drawbacks of this approach include:

- The solution does not resemble its logical structure, e.g. elements of a matrix cannot be accessed with, for example, `matrix[row][col]`, but with `matrix[row * size + col]`
- It is best suited for perfectly rectangular arrays, i.e. arrays whose sub-arrays all have equal length
```

<details>

```c
char* game_of_life(int generations, char* initial_generation, int* world_h, int* world_w) {

     //allocating a large  linear buffer of memory for the world map
    char** world_data = malloc(world_h * world_w);
    //allocating smaller array to hold pointers to rows
    char* world_rows = malloc(world_h);
    for(int i=0; i < world_h; ++i)
        //put rows into the array
        world_rows[i] = world_data + i * world_w;

    for(int i=0 i < generations; ++i) {
        //... actual game, which potentially requires additional (re)allocations...
        
        //...
        world_rows[i][j] = 'x'; //set a cell as alive
    }

    //return the final state of the game world to the caller
    return world_rows;
}

void destroy_world(char** world_rows) {

    //... deallocate large buffer, which starts at the
    //first row of the 2D array
    free(world[0]);

    //deallocate the smaller buffer
    free(world_rows);
}
```

</details>

> This method is somewhat problematic when the width of the internal arrrays is a subject to change thorough the calculations. While both buffers can be easily reallocated to grow or shrink (for example to add new rows), changing the width of the array causes that the data in rows needs to be manually "shifted apart", and entries in the rows array need to be updated.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This method is somewhat problematic when the width of the internal arrays is subject to change through calculations. While both buffers can be easily reallocated to grow or shrink (for example to add new rows), changing the width of the array requires the data in rows to be manually "shifted apart", and entries in the affected rows need to be updated.
```

> This approach is also requires additional book-keeping when used for jagged arrays, unless entries of adjacent rows are clearly separated (as it happens for, for example, an array of C-strings).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This approach also requires additional book-keeping when used for jagged arrays, unless entries of adjacent rows are clearly separated, e.g. as it happens for an array of C-strings.
```

# Memory Management in C kata

_TBD: intro_

<!--
- SRP
- strdup and asprintf are nonstandard
- avoid string constants, use named symbols
-->

It often happens that the solution function has to accept and return more values than just these related to the kata task itself. There can be more parameters required for tracking the memory, sizes of allocated buffers, statuses, etc. Depending on exact requirements, these parameters can be passed in and returned as separate function arguments, or can be packed together into some kind of structure. Examples in this article assume the former, but authors are free to decide otherwise.

## Arrays and strings

> Since C-strings and arrays of other types are similar from the perspective of memory management, this article uses examples of integer arrays. However most of the techniques presented here applies equally to handling memory holding integers, floats, characters, zero-terminated or not.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Since C-strings and arrays of other types are similar from the perspective of memory management, this article uses examples of integer arrays. However, most of the techniques presented here apply equally to handling memory holding integers, floats, and characters, zero-terminated or not.
```

### Naive approach: `malloc` in the solution and `free` in tests

In a vast majority of cases when a kata requires the solution to allocate memory, authors choose the naive approach of allocating the memory in the solution, and releasing it with `free` in the test suite after performing all necessary assertions:

<details>

Solution:

```c
//get all prime numbers less than upto
int* get_primes(int upto, int* size) {

    //the solution allocates required memory
    int* result = malloc(sizeof(int) * ...);

    //... fill result with primes
    //...

    *size = ...; //assign amount of primes
    return result;
}
```

Test suite:

```c
Test(fixed_tests, should_return_2_and_3_for_4) {
    
    int expected[] {2, 3}, expected_size = 2;
    int actual_size;
    
    //call user solution and expect it to allocate the returned array
    int* actual = get_primes(4, &actual_size);

    //...assert on actual_size
    //...assert on contents of actual

    //after performing all necessary assertions,
    //free the array allocated by the user solution
    free(actual);
}
```

</details>

> This approach mimics the behavior of higher level languages, where functions are able to allocate and return arrays without problems. It seems a natural way for many authors, but, sometimes surprisingly for them, it's often a bad one. It's often bad from a design point of view, but, even worse, in production setups it can be straight invalid and can lead to crashes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This approach mimics the behavior of higher-level languages, where functions can allocate and return arrays without problems. It seems a natural way for many authors, but, sometimes surprisingly for them, it's often a bad one. It's often bad from a design point of view, but, even worse, in production setups, it can be straight invalid and can lead to crashes.
```

### Memory managed by tests

One set of possible techniques assumes that the caller (i.e. the test suite) is the owner of allocated memory and tests should be responsible for allocating and releasing it. Memory is always allocated by the test suite, and the test suite can decide whether it wants to use memory allocated automatically (i.e. on the stack), dynamically (for example with `malloc`), or in some other available way. The test suite is also responsible for releasing it, if necessary. Such allocated buffer is passed to the user's solution to work on, and it's filled with the requested data.

The biggest problem with this philosophy is that the test suite does not always know how much memory the solution would need to fit all the requested results in. But there are a few possible ways to resolve this issue.

#### When the size is known upfront: use preallocated buffer

> Sometimes it's perfectly known how large the result will be before the solution is called. For example, if the test suite asks to generate `n` Fibonacci numbers, it means that the resulting array needs to have the size of at least `n`. Sometimes the exact size is not known exactly, but it's possible to accurately estimate its upper bound. For example, a function which removes punctuation from a string needs to work on a buffer at least as large as an input string, but the result can turn out to be a bit smaller. In such cases, the test suite can allocate the buffer which would be big enough to keep the result, and pass it to the solution function:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Sometimes it's perfectly known how large the result will be before the solution is called. For example, if the test suite asks to generate `n` Fibonacci numbers, it means that the resulting array needs to have the size of at least `n`. Sometimes the exact size is not known exactly, but it's possible to accurately estimate its upper bound. For example, a function that removes punctuation from a string needs to work on a buffer at least as large as an input string, but the result can turn out to be a bit smaller. In such cases, the test suite can allocate the buffer which would be big enough to keep the result, and pass it to the solution function:
```

        int retries = 0;
        while(status == BUFFER_TOO_SMALL) {
            array_size *= 2;
            array = realloc(array, sizeof(int) * array_size);
            status = calculate_fibonaccis(upto, array, array_size, &calculated_count);

            if(retries++ > MAX_RETRIES) {
                //... protect agains ill-behaving solutions which are not able to get the correct status
            }
        }
        
        //You can perform assertions on the status and returned size here, or
        //you can create a separate suite(s) just to test them separately

        //...perform assertions, verify correctness of returned numbers...
    }

    //release the memory after the test
    free(array);
}
```

</details>

### Memory managed by the solution

The opposite of managing memory in the test suite is the approach of delegating the responsibility to the solver. This way, tests do not need to worry about problematic aspects of memory management, kata authors give freedom of implementation to users, and can reduce the boilerplate required to implement memory management.

#### Symmetric functions for allocation and deallocation

> This idea basically boils down to asking users to provide their equivalents of allocation and de-allocation functions. The solution function is responsible not only for solving the task, but also for allocation of memory and storing of book-keeping information. The clean-up function is responsible for releasing resources.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This idea boils down to asking users to provide their equivalents of allocation and de-allocation functions. The solution function is responsible not only for solving the task but also for allocation of memory and storing of book-keeping information. The clean-up function is responsible for releasing resources.
```

char** game_of_life(int generations, char** initial_generation, int* world_h, int* world_w) {

    char** world = ...; //allocating memory for the world map
    
    for(int i=0 i < generations; ++i) {
        //... actual game, which potentially requires additional (re)allocations
    }

    //return the final state of the game world to the caller
    return world;
}

//clean-up function
void destroy_world(char** world) {
    //... deallocate all memory appropriately in a way
    //which matches how the game_of_life allocated it.
}
```

Tests:

```c
int world_w = 3, world_h = 3;
char** initial_generation = ...; //set up a GoL glider
int generations = 25;

//invoke solution function, which allocates memory
char** actual = game_of_life(generations, initial_generation, &world_h, &world_w);

//... perform assertions on the world map and verify the state of its cells

//call the clean-up function, which deallocates all memory
destroy_world(actual);
```

</details>

As this approach very useful for more complex memory structures, a couple of examples can be found in the section on [Two-dimensional arrays](#two-dimensional-arrays).

## Two-dimensional arrays

> Some kata require the user solution to return a two-dimensional array, for example a 2D matrix, or an array of C-strings. Such scenarios are a bit more complex, because not only does the higher order array have to be properly managed, but all its individual entries as well. The exact approach selected for allocation of such structures depend on the scenario, because different techniques are suitable for square or rectangular arrays, jagged arrays, arrays of null-terminated strings, etc.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Some kata require the user solution to return a two-dimensional array, for example, a 2D matrix, or an array of C-strings. Such scenarios are a bit more complex, because not only does the higher-order array have to be properly managed, but all its individual entries as well. The exact approach selected for the allocation of such structures depends on the scenario because different techniques are suitable for square or rectangular arrays, jagged arrays, arrays of null-terminated strings, etc.
```

> Memory for 2D arrays can be managed by the test suite or the user solution. As long as the size of the 2D array is known before calling a solution and does not change through the course of calculations, the test suite can choose to perform all necessary allocations and pass the memory to the solution function ready to use. This is a very good approach when working with chessboards, sudokus, matrices and mazes of predetermined sizes, etc. However, in the case that the size of the answer cannot be easily determined beforehand, the technique with clean-up function provided by the user turns out to be helpful. A user provided clean-up function is used in the examples below, but authors can choose to manage the memory in the test suite if it fits the task of their kata.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Memory for 2D arrays can be managed by the test suite or the user solution. As long as the size of the 2D array is known before calling a solution and does not change through the course of calculations, the test suite can choose to perform all necessary allocations and pass the memory to the solution function ready to use. This is a very good approach when working with chessboards, sudokus, matrices and mazes of predetermined sizes, etc. However, in the case that the size of the answer cannot be easily determined beforehand, the technique with a clean-up function provided by the user turns out to be helpful. A user-provided clean-up function is used in the examples below, but authors can choose to manage the memory in the test suite if it fits the task of their kata.
```

### Naive approach: N+1 allocations

This is the most common yet worst possible approach of using dynamically allocated memory. It tends to be slow, causes excessive memory fragmentation and is usually inferior to available alternatives.

<details>

```c
char** game_of_life(int generations, char** initial_generation, int* world_h, int* world_w) {

     //allocating memory for the world map, row by row
    char** world = malloc(sizeof(char*) * world_h);
    for(int i=0; i < world_h; ++i)
        world[i] = malloc(world_w);
    
    for(int i=0 i < generations; ++i) {
        //... actual game, which potentially requires additional (re)allocations...
    }

    //return the final state of the game world to the caller
    return world;
}

void destroy_world(char** world, int world_h) {
    
    //... deallocate all memory also row by row
    for(int i=0; i < world_h; ++i)
        free(world[i]);
    free(world);
}
```

</details>

### Flat array

> Very often overlooked, but a very good approach to represent 2D arrays is to store them in a regular, linear array of `T[ ]`. It can be effectively used when bounds between inner arrays can be efficiently determined, for example each row of a matrix has a well known length, rows of a Pascal's triangle have precisely defined, although different, lengths, and string entries are clearly terminated.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Very often overlooked, but a very good approach to represent 2D arrays is to store them in a regular, linear array of `T[ ]`. It can be effectively used when bounds between inner arrays can be efficiently determined, for example, each row of a matrix has a well-known length, rows of a Pascal's triangle have precisely defined, although different, lengths, and string entries are clearly terminated.
```

When the structure, layout, or allocation scheme of pointed data is not described, users cannot know how to implement requirements without causing either a crash or a memory leak.

### Interface

It often happens that the solution function has to accept and return more values than just these related to the kata task itself. There can be more parameters required for tracking the memory, sizes of allocated buffers, statuses, etc. Depending on exact requirements, these parameters can be passed in and returned as separate function arguments, or can be packed together into some kind of structure. Examples in this article assume the former, but authors are free to decide otherwise.

### Arrays and strings

Since C-strings and arrays of other types are similar from the perspective of memory management, most of the techniques presented here apply equally to handling memory holding integers, floats, and characters, zero-terminated or not.

## Memory Management Patterns

> In C, unlike for example Python, Java, C# or Javascript, dynamically allocated memory is not managed by the runtime. It's considered to be an external resource, just like a file, a DB or network connection, or a hardware device. The program itself has to take care of it properly, allocating it when necessary, and freeing when no longer needed.

Reviewer: I'm not sure about calling memory an "_external_ resource". Doesn't just "resource" convey the meaning already?

Author: Is this better?

```suggestion
In C, unlike for example Python, Java, C# or Javascript, dynamically allocated memory is not managed by the runtime. It's considered to be a resource like any other, for example a file, a DB or network connection, or a hardware device. The program itself has to take care of it properly, allocating it when necessary, and freeing when no longer needed.
```

Reviewer: I think it's better. Is it normal that I see raw `span`s in Suggested change?..

<details>
    <summary>Example</summary>

Preloaded:

```c
//Provide a typedef for constants.
//If you really want to use strings for some reason, you can use
//constants of type const char*, but it's recommended to take
//this step even further and use an enum.
typedef const char * const Player;

//define constants
Player BLACK = "BLACK";
Player WHITE = "WHITE";
Player NONE  = "NONE";
```

Solution:

```c

//Since Codewars does not allow header files for kata, declarations need to be repeated
typedef const char * const Player;
extern Player BLACK;
extern Player WHITE;
extern Player NONE; 

Player who_won(const char* board) //typedef used for return type 
{
    if(...) {
      return BLACK;    //return constant instead of an allocated string
    } else if (...) {
      return WHITE;
    } else {
      return NONE;
    }
}
```

Tests:

```c
//Since Codewars does not allow header files for kata, declarations need to be repeated
typedef const char * const Player;
extern Player BLACK;
extern Player WHITE;
extern Player NONE; 

Player who_won(const char* board);

Test(fixed_tests, no_one_won) {
 
  Player winner = who_won("B");

  //constants can be asserted on with cr_assert_eq

>   cr_assert_eq(winner, NONE, "Expected: [%s], but was: [%s]", NONE, winner);

Reviewer: Non-string assertion... Although it's supposed to be the same pointer, I think if it's not an enum for whatever reason, it should be treated as a string. Someone will return their own string literal eventually just to get rid of extra declarations in the code.

Author: > Someone will return their own string literal eventually just to get rid of extra declarations in the code.

Fair point.

Author: I removed constant strings completely, replaced them with enums.
